Consolidating the KafkaRebalance API for extensibility (#216)
strimzi/proposals: 137-kafkarebalance-consolidation.md

# Consolidating the KafkaRebalance API for extensibility

 This proposal addresses the increasing complexity and limited extensibility of the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource API. 

>  It introduces a `spec.parameters` map that replaces mode-specific primitive fields with their upstream Cruise Control key-value equivalents allowing users to consult Cruise Control documentation directly and enabling support for new parameters without Strimzi API changes. 

Reviewer: what about using `spec.config` as we have for other custom resources (i.e. Kafka, KafkaBridge, ...) ?

Author: TBH in the original draft I had used `spec.config` for the sake of consistency with other custom resource configurations but then changed it to `spec.parameters`.  I felt that using `spec.parameters` better emphasizes the distinction between configuration file properties and REST API query parameters. It should also help users avoid confusing these query parameters with the `spec.cruiseControl.config` options in the Kafka resource. WDYT?

Reviewer: The `KafkaRebalance` is an abstraction on the top of the CC REST API so I can see your point of having a sort of 1:1 matching with the query parameters on the REST call ... but still not sure if having a more friendly and well-known name like "config" would be better for users in terms of UX. Let's see what others think before making any changes.

Reviewer 2: I would personally go with `.spec.config` and have it consistent across all resources. Maybe it's just me, but I don't feel like we need to reflect the naming what we are using internally - and I think that users will not care that those are "parameters" for the REST API. So having `parameters` feels like it would be just something for us.

Author: Fair points, I switched it back to `spec.config` just to show what it would look like (I can easily change it back in a later commit) I'll leave this comment unresolved for now so people can see this conversation and add their thoughts whether it be for or against

 It also replaces the action-specific `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field with a generic `volumes` field reusable by any mode that targets specific volumes on specific brokers. 
 These changes establish a clear separation between rebalance mode selection and tuning configuration preventing API sprawl as new modes are introduced. 

## Current situation

The `KafkaRebalance` resource currently supports four distinct modes:
- `full` - Rebalances across all brokers in the cluster.
- `add-brokers` - Moves replicas to newly added brokers.
- `remove-brokers` - Moves replicas out of brokers to be removed.

> - `remove-disks` - Moves data between JBOD volumes within the same broker.

Reviewer: This definition seems to be more about the rebalanceDisk option than the remove disks.

Author: Fixed.

2. **Poor Field Organization**: Mode-specific and common fields are intermixed at the same level, making it unclear which fields apply to which mode without consulting documentation or implementation code.

3. **Documentation Burden**: As more modes are added, the documentation must explain increasingly complex field interdependencies and conditional requirements.

4. **Future Mode Constraints**: Adding new modes becomes increasingly difficult as the top-level namespace becomes crowded with mode-specific fields.

5. **Action-Specific Naming**: The `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field encodes a specific action ("move replicas off") in its name making it unsuitable for reuse by future modes that target volumes for different purposes (e.g., broker demotion). 
This forces each new volume-related mode to introduce its own field.

## Motivation

The motivation for this proposal stems from several factors:

1. **Prevent API Debt**: As discussed in planning for future modes (like broker demotion support) we should not continue adding primitive fields to the top-level spec for every new mode.

> 2. **Improve User Experience**: Users should be able to distinguish at a glance between what an operation targets (`mode`, `brokers`, `volumes`) and refer to upstream [Cruise Control documentation](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs) on how different endpoint or "modes" are tuned.

Reviewer: The usage of modes and endpoints sounds confusing here because as today, each mode corresponds to an endpoint in the end.

Author: What if we just used "endpoints" here?

When this operand is used for modes where it is not relevant (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, or `remove-brokers`) an error is written in the status of the `KafkaRebalance` resource and warning is logged.
- `parameters` - A map using upstream parameter names as specified by the [Cruise Control REST API](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs). 
Here is a list of the parameters names that will replace the existing primitive fields that are used in the `KafkaRebalance` API today:
  - `goals` - Optimization goals (comma-separated string)
  - `skip_hard_goal_check` - Whether to skip hard goal checks
  - `excluded_topics` - Regex pattern for topics to exclude
  - `replica_movement_strategies` - Replica movement strategies (comma-separated string)
  - `rebalance_disk` - Enable intra-broker disk rebalancing
  - `concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker` - Concurrent inter-broker movements per broker
  - `concurrent_intra_broker_partition_movements` - Concurrent intra-broker movements
  - `concurrent_leader_movements` - Concurrent leader movements

>   - `replication_throttle` - Replication bandwidth throttle in bytes/sec

Reviewer: While mapping to the exact names within CC query string parameters could be a good thing, I think it doesn't follow the Kubernetes patterns about using camel case.

Author: You are right, it doesn't follow the Kubernetes patterns of using camel case. This is intentional, this specific config is intended as a passthrough to Cruise Control instead of a Strimzi-defined API abstraction. The snake_case, inherited from Cruise Control API, emphasizes that these are CC-native keys instead of Strimzi abstractions. Could other custom resources that expose raw upstream configuration as maps (e.g., Kakfa custom resources 'spec.cruiseControl.config` and `spec.kafka.config`) be used as a precedent to justify this approach?

Reviewer: Yeah that's a good point. I am fine with it.

   - Accept both old top-level primitive fields and new `parameters` map.
   - Accept both `moveReplicasOffVolumes` and `volumes` (mapped to the same internal representation)
   - If both old and new forms are provided, the new form takes precedence
   - Log deprecation warnings when old top-level primitive fields or `moveReplicasOffVolumes` are used

2. **Update documentation** to promote the new structure while documenting the old structure as deprecated.

3. **Update examples** to show the usage of the deprecated and the new structure.

4. **Add validation** that warns about mixing old and new structures.

### Validation Improvements

With the new structure, validation is split across two layers:

1. **Mode-specific operand validation**:
   - `brokers` is required and non-empty for `add-brokers` and `remove-brokers` modes
   - `volumes` is required and non-empty for `remove-disks` mode.
   - Strimzi will log a warning and write an error in the `KafkaRebalance` status when `brokers` or `volumes` are provided but irrelevant to the selected mode.

2. **Parameter field validation**:

>    - Strimzi will write the error returned from Cruise Control REST API to the `KafkaRebalance` status when an invalid configuration parameter is used in conjunction with a specific rebalance "mode".

Reviewer: Where Strimzi is going to "write" the error? AFAIU from the proposal there is no prevalidation of the parameters and they are passed as they are to the CC API. It will return an error if parameters are not valid and I would expect the KafkaRebalance will move to NotReady state where we'll have a warning condition with the error. If this is what you had in mind I think it's important to clarify the process here.

Author: Yes, this is what I had in mind, just fixed in latest commit.

  - `replica_movement_strategies` - Replica movement strategies (comma-separated string)
  - `rebalance_disk` - Enable intra-broker disk rebalancing
  - `concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker` - Concurrent inter-broker movements per broker
  - `concurrent_intra_broker_partition_movements` - Concurrent intra-broker movements
  - `concurrent_leader_movements` - Concurrent leader movements
  - `replication_throttle` - Replication bandwidth throttle in bytes/sec

### Implementation Strategy

1. **Introduce the new `parameters` map and `volumes` field** while maintaining backward compatibility:
   - Accept both old top-level primitive fields and new `parameters` map.
   - Accept both `moveReplicasOffVolumes` and `volumes` (mapped to the same internal representation)
   - If both old and new forms are provided, the new form takes precedence
   - Log deprecation warnings when old top-level primitive fields or `moveReplicasOffVolumes` are used

2. **Update documentation** to promote the new structure while documenting the old structure as deprecated.

3. **Update examples** to show the usage of the deprecated and the new structure.

> 4. **Add validation** that warns about mixing old and new structures.

Reviewer 2: I think that you should also add point where you deprecate the current old fields, which will be removed in next API version (which can be in few years actually).

Author: Fixed.

### Validation Improvements

With the new structure, validation is split across two layers:

1. **Mode-specific operand validation**:
   - `brokers` is required and non-empty for `add-brokers` and `remove-brokers` modes
   - `volumes` is required and non-empty for `remove-disks` mode.
   - Strimzi will log a warning and write an error in the `KafkaRebalance` status when `brokers` or `volumes` are provided but irrelevant to the selected mode.

2. **Parameter field validation**:

>    - Strimzi does not pre-validate parameters entries.

Reviewer 2: Maybe completely stupid question, but today we are pre-validating the parameters specified in the CR, right?
How it would work when you have some fields specified under old structure and some in new structure? Will it automatically skip the validation from now on or it will be semi-validated? (As I said, maybe completely stupid question, sorry).

Author: Not a stupid question at all.

Right now we only do loose validation on some of primitive fields that we’re planning to deprecate in favor of the new config. For example, we might enforce simple constraints like minimum values for fields such as `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker`.

If a CR includes a mix of old and new structure, it won’t skip the validation of the deprecated primitive fields if they are included. That being said the parameters included as part of the new config will take preference. For example, if a primitive field is included with a valid value and it's equivalent field in the new config is included with an incorrect value, the `KafkaRebalance` resource will be put in the `NotReady` state and a condition with the error will be added.

Does that answer the question?

Reviewer 2: Sorry I realized I didn't reply here - yeah it answers my question, thanks :)

# Consolidating the KafkaRebalance API for extensibility

 This proposal addresses the increasing complexity and limited extensibility of the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource API. 

>  It introduces a `spec.config` map that replaces mode-specific primitive fields with their upstream Cruise Control key-value equivalents allowing users to consult Cruise Control documentation directly and enabling support for new parameters without Strimzi API changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 It introduces a `spec.config` map that replaces mode-specific primitive fields with their upstream Cruise Control key-value equivalents, allowing users to consult Cruise Control documentation directly and enabling support for new parameters without Strimzi API changes.
```

 It also replaces the action-specific `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field with a generic `volumes` field reusable by any mode that targets specific volumes on specific brokers. 

>  These changes establish a clear separation between rebalance mode selection and tuning configuration preventing API sprawl as new modes are introduced.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 These changes establish a clear separation between rebalance mode selection and tuning configuration, preventing API sprawl as new modes are introduced.
```

## Current situation

The `KafkaRebalance` resource currently supports four distinct modes:
- `full` - Rebalances across all brokers in the cluster.
- `add-brokers` - Moves replicas to newly added brokers.
- `remove-brokers` - Moves replicas out of brokers to be removed.
- `remove-disks` - Moves replicas off specified JBOD volumes of specified brokers so those volumes can be removed.

> Over time as new modes have been added the API has accumulated an increasing number of top-level fields, many of which are only applicable to specific modes. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Over time, as new modes have been added, the API has accumulated an increasing number of top-level fields, many of which are only applicable to specific modes. 
```

| `excludedTopics` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Regex pattern for topics to exclude         |
| `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Concurrent inter-broker partition movements |
| `concurrentLeaderMovements` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Concurrent leader movements                 |
| `replicationThrottle` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Replication bandwidth throttle (bytes/sec)  |
| `replicaMovementStrategies` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Replica movement strategy class list        |

All parameters are currently defined as top-level fields in `KafkaRebalanceSpec`, making it unclear from the API schema alone which fields apply to which mode. 
This information is only enforced at runtime in `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator`, which selects a mode-specific options builder (`RebalanceOptions`, `AddBrokerOptions`, `RemoveBrokerOptions`, or `RemoveDisksOptions`) that inherits common parameters from `AbstractRebalanceOptions`.

### Problems with the current approach

> 1. **API Sprawl**: Each new mode requires adding new top-level fields making the API increasingly difficult to understand and maintain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **API Sprawl**: Each new mode requires adding new top-level fields, making the API increasingly difficult to understand and maintain.
```

> 2. **Poor Field Organization**: Mode-specific and common fields are intermixed at the same level, making it unclear which fields apply to which mode without consulting documentation or implementation code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. **Poor Field Organization**: Mode-specific and common fields are mixed at the same level, making it unclear which fields apply to which mode without consulting documentation or implementation code.
```

3. **Documentation Burden**: As more modes are added, the documentation must explain increasingly complex field interdependencies and conditional requirements.

4. **Future Mode Constraints**: Adding new modes becomes increasingly difficult as the top-level namespace becomes crowded with mode-specific fields.

> 5. **Action-Specific Naming**: The `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field encodes a specific action ("move replicas off") in its name making it unsuitable for reuse by future modes that target volumes for different purposes (e.g., broker demotion). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. **Action-Specific Naming**: The `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field encodes a specific action ("move replicas off") in its name, making it unsuitable for reuse by future modes that target volumes for different purposes (e.g., broker demotion). 
```

This forces each new volume-related mode to introduce its own field.

## Motivation

The motivation for this proposal stems from several factors:

> 1. **Prevent API Debt**: As discussed in planning for future modes (like broker demotion support) we should not continue adding primitive fields to the top-level spec for every new mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **Prevent API Debt**: As discussed in planning for future modes (like broker demotion support), we should not continue adding primitive fields to the top-level spec for every new mode.
```

> 2. **Improve User Experience**: Users should be able to distinguish at a glance between what an operation targets (`mode`, `brokers`, `volumes`) and refer to upstream [Cruise Control documentation](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs) on how different endpoints are tuned.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. **Improve User Experience**: Users should be able to distinguish at a glance what an operation targets (`mode`, `brokers`, `volumes`) and refer to upstream [Cruise Control documentation](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs) on how different endpoints are tuned.
```

3. **Maintain Long-term API Sustainability**: The current trajectory will lead to a bloated and confusing API that becomes increasingly difficult to maintain and extend.

4. **Prepare for Volume-Targeting Modes**: Future modes like broker demotion will need to target specific volumes on specific brokers. 
A generic `volumes` field allows these modes to reuse the existing targeting mechanism.

## Proposal

### API Structure Redesign

> Consolidate auxiliary configuration fields into a new `spec.config` map keeping `mode`, `brokers`, and add a new `volumes` field at the top level of `spec`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consolidate auxiliary configuration fields into a new `spec.config` map, keeping `mode`, `brokers`, and adding a new `volumes` field at the top level of `spec`:
```

- `mode`: A string representing the rebalancing operation (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, `remove-brokers`, `remove-disks`)

> - `brokers`: a list of integers identifying the brokers the operation targets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `brokers`: A list of integers identifying the brokers the operation targets.
```

> - `volumes`: a list of objects, each containing a `brokerId` (integer) and `volumeIds` (list of integers), identifying the volumes the operation targets. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `volumes`: A list of objects, each containing a `brokerId` (integer) and `volumeIds` (list of integers), identifying the volumes the operation targets. 
```

> Replaces the current `moveReplicasOffVolumes` with an generic name that can be reused by any mode that needs to target specific volumes on specific brokers (e.g., `remove-disks` today, `demote-brokers` in the future).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Replaces the current `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field with a generic name that can be reused by any mode that needs to target specific volumes on specific brokers (e.g., `remove-disks` today, `demote-brokers` in the future).
```

- `config`: a map replacing the existing primitive fields (`skipHardGoalCheck`, `rebalanceDisk`, `excludedTopics`, `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker`, `concurrentIntraBrokerPartitionMovements`, `concurrentLeaderMovements`, `replicationThrottle`, `goals`, `replicaMovementStrategies`) with their upstream Cruise Control key-value equivalents.
These primitive fields are the primary source of API sprawl.
Instead of maintaining Strimzi-specific field names, `config` entries use the keys and values defined by the [Cruise Control REST API](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs) directly.

> This eliminates the translation layer between Strimzi field names and Cruise Control parameters allowing users to consult Cruise Control documentation directly and allows new Cruise Control parameters to be supported without changes to the Strimzi API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This removes the translation layer between Strimzi field names and Cruise Control parameters, allowing users to consult Cruise Control documentation directly and new Cruise Control parameters to be supported without changes to the Strimzi API.
```

#### Proposed API Structure

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: my-rebalance
spec:
  mode: remove-disks  # full, add-brokers, remove-brokers, remove-disks
  volumes:
    - brokerId: 0
      volumeIds: [1, 2]
    - brokerId: 2
      volumeIds: [1]

  # All auxiliary configurations consolidated under config
  config:
    stop_ongoing_execution: "false"
```

### Field Organization Principles

**Top-level `spec` fields** (mode selector, operands, and optimization configuration):
- `mode` - The rebalancing mode (unchanged)
- `brokers` - List of broker IDs for `add-brokers` and `remove-brokers` modes (unchanged).

> When this operand is used for modes where it is not relevant (e.g. `full` or `remove-disks`) an error is written in the status of the `KafkaRebalance` resource and warning is logged.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When this operand is used for modes where it is not relevant (e.g. `full` or `remove-disks`), an error is written in the status of the `KafkaRebalance` resource and a warning is logged.
```

> For the case where this operand is used in conjunction with the `remove-disks` mode, where a brokers list could be relevant, the operator will note to use `volumes` instead in the error and log message.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When this operand is used with the `remove-disks` mode, where a brokers list could be relevant, the operator will note to use `volumes` instead in the error and log message.
```

This distinction will be documented as well.
- `volumes` - List of broker/volume ID mappings for `remove-disks` and future volume-targeting modes (replaces `moveReplicasOffVolumes`)

> When this operand is used for modes where it is not relevant (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, or `remove-brokers`) an error is written in the status of the `KafkaRebalance` resource and warning is logged.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When this operand is used for modes where it is not relevant (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, or `remove-brokers`), an error is written in the status of the `KafkaRebalance` resource and warning is logged.
```

- `config` - A map using upstream parameter names as specified by the [Cruise Control REST API](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs).

> Here is a list of the config keys that will replace the existing primitive fields that are used in the `KafkaRebalance` API today:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following config keys will replace the primitive fields that are currently used in the `KafkaRebalance` API:
```

3. **Update examples** to show the usage of the deprecated and the new structure.

4. **Add validation** that warns about mixing old and new structures.

5. **Deprecate old fields and plan removal** Mark the old top-level primitive fields: `goals`, `skipHardGoalCheck`, `rebalanceDisk`, `excludedTopics`, `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker`, `concurrentIntraBrokerPartitionMovements`, `concurrentLeaderMovements`,
  `replicationThrottle`, `replicaMovementStrategies` and `moveReplicasOffVolumes` as deprecated in the current API version.
  These fields will be removed in the next API version.

### Validation Improvements

With the new structure, validation is split across two layers:

1. **Mode-specific operand validation**:
   - `brokers` is required and non-empty for `add-brokers` and `remove-brokers` modes
   - `volumes` is required and non-empty for `remove-disks` mode.
   - Strimzi will log a warning and write an error in the `KafkaRebalance` status when `brokers` or `volumes` are provided but irrelevant to the selected mode.

2. **Parameter field validation**:
   - Strimzi won't pre-validate new config parameter entries.

>    Strimzi will pass the config parameters as-is to the Cruise Control REST API.

Reviewer 3: Any security considerations to mention here? Or how compatibility is handled between Strimzi and Cruise Control versions?

Author: Thanks for raising this, there actually should be some parameter validation to mitigate users accidentally breaking the `KafkaRebalance` state machine and status. I have just added some notes on filtering parameters in the latest commit.

The parameter filtering should address any potential misuse or security concerns. As for compatibility between Strimzi and Cruise Control versions, a parameter that is unsupported by the bundle Cruise Control version will be rejected by Cruise Control at runtime and Strimzi will surface the error by transitioning the `KafkaRebalance` resource.

Did I understand/answer the question correctly @PaulRMellor?

   If Cruise Control returns an error for an invalid or unsupported parameter, Strimzi will transition the `KafkaRebalance` resource to the `NotReady` state and write a warning condition containing the error returned by Cruise Control.
   - Strimzi will write the error returned from Cruise Control REST API to the `KafkaRebalance` status when an invalid configuration parameter is used in conjunction with a specific rebalance "mode".

### Example Configurations

> #### Example of a `full` inter-broker Rebalance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Example of a `full` inter-broker rebalance
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: full-rebalance
spec:
  mode: full
  config:
    goals: "CpuCapacityGoal, NetworkInboundCapacityGoal, DiskCapacityGoal"
    max_partition_movements_in_cluster: "100"
    concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker: "10"
```

> #### Example of a `full` intra-broker (Disk) Rebalance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Example of a `full` intra-broker (Disk) rebalance
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: full-rebalance
spec:
  mode: full
  config:
    rebalance_disk: "true"
    goals: "IntraBrokerDiskCapacityGoal, IntraBrokerDiskUsageDistributionGoal"
    concurrent_intra_broker_partition_movements: "2"
```

> #### Example of an `add-brokers` Rebalance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Example of an `add-brokers` rebalance
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: add-brokers-rebalance
spec:
  mode: add-brokers
  brokers: [3, 4]
  config:
    goals: "RackAwareGoal, ReplicaCapacityGoal"
    concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker: "10"
    replication_throttle: "20971520"
```

> #### Example of a `remove-disks` Rebalance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Example of a `remove-disks` rebalance
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: remove-disks-rebalance
spec:
  mode: remove-disks
  volumes:
    - brokerId: 0
      volumeIds: [1, 2]
    - brokerId: 2
      volumeIds: [1]
  config:
    stop_ongoing_execution: "false"
```

### Future Extensibility

This structure enables cleaner additions for future modes. 
The top-level operand fields (`brokers`, `volumes`) provide a stable, reusable targeting mechanism and allow supporting new optimization parameters without the need to update the Strimzi `KafkaRebalance` API. One example of this would be to add broker demotion support.

## Affected/not affected projects

This proposal affects only the Strimzi Cluster Operator.

## Compatibility

### Backward Compatibility Strategy

The proposal maintains strict backward compatibility. 
Both old and new structures are supported:

> - Old top-level primitive fields reads as before, with deprecation warnings

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Old top-level primitive fields read as before, with deprecation warnings
```

- `moveReplicasOffVolumes` is mapped internally to `volumes`

> - New `config` map and `volumes` field is used when present.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The new `config` map and `volumes` field are used when present.
```

| `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Concurrent inter-broker partition movements |
| `concurrentLeaderMovements` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Concurrent leader movements                 |
| `replicationThrottle` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Replication bandwidth throttle (bytes/sec)  |
| `replicaMovementStrategies` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Replica movement strategy class list        |

All parameters are currently defined as top-level fields in `KafkaRebalanceSpec`, making it unclear from the API schema alone which fields apply to which mode. 
This information is only enforced at runtime in `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator`, which selects a mode-specific options builder (`RebalanceOptions`, `AddBrokerOptions`, `RemoveBrokerOptions`, or `RemoveDisksOptions`) that inherits common parameters from `AbstractRebalanceOptions`.

### Problems with the current approach

1. **API Sprawl**: Each new mode requires adding new top-level fields, making the API increasingly difficult to understand and maintain.

> 2. **Poor Field Organization**: Mode-specific and common fields are mixed at the same level, making it unclear which fields apply to which mode without consulting documentation or implementation code.

Reviewer: I don't think we are going to solve this problem with the proposal. All parameters will go into the `spec.config` field but you would need consulting the documentation to understand for which mode they work anyway, or?

Author: Yes, that’s a fair point, this proposal doesn’t directly solve that problem. It essentially shifts the responsibility to the upstream Cruise Control documentation to clarify which parameters apply in which modes.

In the proposal, the move to `spec.config` is more about making that separation explicit and avoiding encoding mode-specific behavior into the API itself rather than eliminating the need to understand those distinctions.

Does that make sense?

Reviewer: Yes fine.

The following config keys will replace the primitive fields that are currently used in the `KafkaRebalance` API:
  - `goals` - Optimization goals (comma-separated string)
  - `skip_hard_goal_check` - Whether to skip hard goal checks
  - `excluded_topics` - Regex pattern for topics to exclude
  - `replica_movement_strategies` - Replica movement strategies (comma-separated string)
  - `rebalance_disk` - Enable intra-broker disk rebalancing
  - `concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker` - Concurrent inter-broker movements per broker
  - `concurrent_intra_broker_partition_movements` - Concurrent intra-broker movements
  - `concurrent_leader_movements` - Concurrent leader movements
  - `replication_throttle` - Replication bandwidth throttle in bytes/sec

### Implementation Strategy

1. **Introduce the new `config` map and `volumes` field** while maintaining backward compatibility:
   - Accept both old top-level primitive fields and new `config` map.
   - Accept both `moveReplicasOffVolumes` and `volumes` (mapped to the same internal representation)

>    - If both old and new forms are provided, the new form takes precedence

Reviewer: I think we could even log a warning that they are both set but the old form will be ignored.

Reviewer: Also what happens in the following scenario?

```yaml
spec:           
    concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker: 10  # old                                                                                                                                                                   
    config:                                         
      concurrent_leader_movements: "5"  # new but different field 
```

Is the logic going to ignore the old `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker` because the resource has a `spec.config` field or it's going to make a merge because they are referring to two different fields?

Author: It would make a merge, respecting both fields and values but a warning would still be logged for the usage of the old `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker` form.

Author: Just updated some text here in to address the first comment in the latest commit, let me know what you think!

Reviewer: I would expect a merge yes, but at the same time, if our goal is discourage the usage of the current properties in favor of the config section, we could also decide that if you set the config section, it's going to override everything else coming from the dedicated fields. It could be counterintuitive though. In the past we had something similar with templates across Kafka and KafkaNodePool and we moved from an override approach to a merge. Let's see what others think about this.

Reviewer: @strimzi/maintainers any thoughts on this?

Author: @tinaselenge do you have any thoughts/opinions on this?

Author: @ShubhamRwt had an idea [0] that we only allow the user to use the new API format or the old, and if users mix the APIs the `KafkaRebalance` resource goes into `NotReady` state. I actually quite like this idea. I think it might help users avoid confusion over the formats and encourage them to migrate to the new API, it might even reduce code complexity of the implementation.

I know we have used a merge approach with the `Kafka` and the `KafkaNodePool` resources but I think enforcing users to use one API format would have more benefits.

[0] https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/216#discussion_r3585844960

Reviewer 4: I don't think we should do a merge. This is different from the `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` templating scenario where we wanted to keep both options. Here we should be favouring the new API. I agree that the suggestion of having the `KafkaRebalance` become not ready is a good one. It means we don't accidentally perform a rebalance with configuration different from what the user expects without needing to have complicated merge logic.

Author: Updated the proposal following Shubham's suggestion with the latest commit. Take a look when you get a chance and let me know what you think!

Author: From Jakub's feedback below, I believe he may be favor of a merge as well

> Mixing of new and old fields is allowed
Deprecation warnings are issues automatically, no need to do anything about them
If both fields are set, new fields takes priority, but you can issue a warning that they conflict.

This is another place I would like to get consensus on, whether:

(A) We merge the fields
(B) We only allow all new API fields or all old API fields.

I am leaning towards (B) but I don't mind doing (A).  Given the discussion above do people have a strong preference on this? I think both options have good justifications but I want to agree on a single option/direction for this so we can move this forward.

CC @ppatierno @ShubhamRwt @tinaselenge @katheris @scholzj any strong opinions for or against?

Reviewer 5: +1 for (B) as it keeps things more clear and avoid any sort of complex. merge logic

Reviewer 6: There is no complex logic. Each old field should have a clear mapping to a new field. We should handle this in the same way how we handled the previous API changes:
* Take the resource on the beginning of the reconciliation
* Check the old fields
* If the old field is set, check the new field
* If the new field is empty, move the value from old field there
* If the new field is also set, raise a warning and ignore the old value
* Continue with the reconciliation

That is the standard process we follow. Last used for example in the MirrorMaker 2 and Connect API changes and other `v1` API related changes.

Author: >  Each old field should have a clear mapping to a new field. We should handle this in the same way how we handled the previous API changes

> That is the standard process we follow. Last used for example in the MirrorMaker 2 and Connect API changes and other v1 API related changes.

These are a fair points, the transitions of those went pretty smoothly as I remember and the logic added was easy to remove later too. I have updated the proposal to follow this process, citing Mirror Maker 2 and Connect API changes as precedents.

Updates are in the latest commit.

    max_partition_movements_in_cluster: "100"
    concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker: "10"
```
#### Example of a `full` intra-broker (Disk) rebalance
```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: full-rebalance
spec:
  mode: full
  config:
    rebalance_disk: "true"
    goals: "IntraBrokerDiskCapacityGoal, IntraBrokerDiskUsageDistributionGoal"
    concurrent_intra_broker_partition_movements: "2"
```

#### Example of an `add-brokers` rebalance
```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: add-brokers-rebalance
spec:
  mode: add-brokers
  brokers: [3, 4]
  config:
    goals: "RackAwareGoal, ReplicaCapacityGoal"
    concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker: "10"
    replication_throttle: "20971520"
```

#### Example of a `remove-disks` rebalance
```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: remove-disks-rebalance
spec:
  mode: remove-disks
  volumes:
    - brokerId: 0
      volumeIds: [1, 2]
    - brokerId: 2
      volumeIds: [1]
  config:
    stop_ongoing_execution: "false"
```

### Future Extensibility

This structure enables cleaner additions for future modes. 

> The top-level operand fields (`brokers`, `volumes`) provide a stable, reusable targeting mechanism and allow supporting new optimization parameters without the need to update the Strimzi `KafkaRebalance` API. One example of this would be to add broker demotion support.

Reviewer: Can you add an example of how the broker demotion would leverage the new API?

Author: Fixed.

The `KafkaRebalance` resource currently supports four distinct modes:
- `full` - Rebalances across all brokers in the cluster.
- `add-brokers` - Moves replicas to newly added brokers.
- `remove-brokers` - Moves replicas out of brokers to be removed.
- `remove-disks` - Moves replicas off specified JBOD volumes of specified brokers so those volumes can be removed.

Over time, as new modes have been added, the API has accumulated an increasing number of top-level fields, many of which are only applicable to specific modes. 
The following table shows which `KafkaRebalanceSpec` parameters are supported by each mode based on the current operator implementation:

| Parameter | `full` | `add-brokers` | `remove-brokers` | `remove-disks` | Notes                                       |
|---|---|---|---|----------------|---------------------------------------------|
| `mode` | -- | -- | -- | --             | Rebalance mode, defaults to `full`          |
| `brokers` | ignored | **required** | **required** | ignored        | List of broker IDs for the operation        |
| `moveReplicasOffVolumes` | ignored | ignored | ignored | **required**   | List of broker/volume ID mappings           |

> | `rebalanceDisk` | supported | ignored | ignored | ignored        | Enables intra-broker disk rebalancing       |

Reviewer 6: Should this be a new `mode`?

Author: So far, each rebalanacing `mode` maps to a specific Cruise Control REST API endpoint, this field is used exclusively with the Cruise Control's `rebalance` endpoint [1]  (except for the `proposals` endpoint).

In theory, we could introduce a new mode called `rebalance_disk` that calls the rebalance endpoint with the rebalanceDisk parameter set to true. This could simplify the UX for Strimzi users surrounding intra-broker or disk rebalancing. However, I think the UX surrounding disk rebalancing would be better demystified/simplified in the upstream Cruise Control implementation, REST API, and documentation first.

[1] https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/rest-apis#trigger-a-workload-balance

| `concurrentIntraBrokerPartitionMovements` | supported | ignored | ignored | ignored        | Concurrent intra-broker partition movements |
| `goals` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Optimization goal list                      |
| `skipHardGoalCheck` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Whether to skip hard goal validation        |
| `excludedTopics` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Regex pattern for topics to exclude         |
| `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Concurrent inter-broker partition movements |
| `concurrentLeaderMovements` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Concurrent leader movements                 |
| `replicationThrottle` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Replication bandwidth throttle (bytes/sec)  |

> | `replicaMovementStrategies` | supported | supported | supported | ignored        | Replica movement strategy class list        |

Reviewer 6: Please format the table with spacing to make it readable without Markdown rendering.

Author: Fixed.

3. **Maintain Long-term API Sustainability**: The current trajectory will lead to a bloated and confusing API that becomes increasingly difficult to maintain and extend.

4. **Prepare for Volume-Targeting Modes**: Future modes like broker demotion will need to target specific volumes on specific brokers. 
A generic `volumes` field allows these modes to reuse the existing targeting mechanism.

## Proposal

### API Structure Redesign

Consolidate auxiliary configuration fields into a new `spec.config` map, keeping `mode`, `brokers`, and adding a new `volumes` field at the top level of `spec`:

- `mode`: A string representing the rebalancing operation (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, `remove-brokers`, `remove-disks`)
- `brokers`: A list of integers identifying the brokers the operation targets.
- `volumes`: A list of objects, each containing a `brokerId` (integer) and `volumeIds` (list of integers), identifying the volumes the operation targets. 
Replaces the current `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field with a generic name that can be reused by any mode that needs to target specific volumes on specific brokers (e.g., `remove-disks` today, `demote-brokers` in the future).

> - `config`: a map replacing the existing primitive fields (`skipHardGoalCheck`, `rebalanceDisk`, `excludedTopics`, `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker`, `concurrentIntraBrokerPartitionMovements`, `concurrentLeaderMovements`, `replicationThrottle`, `goals`, `replicaMovementStrategies`) with their upstream Cruise Control key-value equivalents.

Reviewer 6: I wonder if this goes a bit too much from one extreme to another. I wonder if we can have a bit more reasoning on a field-by-field basis. In the table covering the existing fields you cover when they are supported. A lot of them seem to be supported in many modes. Another consideration should be how much we expect the fields to be used. E.g.:

```
* The `goals` field is accepted in 4 out of 5 modes. We expect many users to use it, so it remains as a separate field.
* The `replicaMovementStrategies` field is accepted in 4 out of 5 modes. But it is an expert option and we do not expect it to be used by most users. That is why it should be moved as an opaque config unser the `.spec.config` section.
```

(The above is just an example, I'm not sure it is as I wrote there 😉)

Author: That's a fair point, let me think a bit more on this when I am fresh.

I have added some placeholder text in the meantime but will ping you on this thread once I have gone through each field and added a proper justification.

Author: Alright, I have gone through the fields and added more detail for each case in the latest, let me know what you think!

When this operand is used for modes where it is not relevant (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, or `remove-brokers`), an error is written in the status of the `KafkaRebalance` resource and warning is logged.
- `config` - A map using upstream parameter names as specified by the [Cruise Control REST API](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs).
The following config keys will replace the primitive fields that are currently used in the `KafkaRebalance` API:
  - `goals` - Optimization goals (comma-separated string)
  - `skip_hard_goal_check` - Whether to skip hard goal checks
  - `excluded_topics` - Regex pattern for topics to exclude
  - `replica_movement_strategies` - Replica movement strategies (comma-separated string)
  - `rebalance_disk` - Enable intra-broker disk rebalancing
  - `concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker` - Concurrent inter-broker movements per broker
  - `concurrent_intra_broker_partition_movements` - Concurrent intra-broker movements
  - `concurrent_leader_movements` - Concurrent leader movements
  - `replication_throttle` - Replication bandwidth throttle in bytes/sec

### Implementation Strategy

> 1. **Introduce the new `config` map and `volumes` field** while maintaining backward compatibility:

Reviewer 6: Might be worth explaining a bit more how this will be done.

Author: I have added more detail on specifics in the latest commit.

Let me know what you think!

- `mode`: A string representing the rebalancing operation (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, `remove-brokers`, `remove-disks`)
- `brokers`: A list of integers identifying the brokers the operation targets.
- `volumes`: A list of objects, each containing a `brokerId` (integer) and `volumeIds` (list of integers), identifying the volumes the operation targets. 
Replaces the current `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field with a generic name that can be reused by any mode that needs to target specific volumes on specific brokers (e.g., `remove-disks` today, `demote-brokers` in the future).
- `config`: a map replacing the existing primitive fields (`skipHardGoalCheck`, `rebalanceDisk`, `excludedTopics`, `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker`, `concurrentIntraBrokerPartitionMovements`, `concurrentLeaderMovements`, `replicationThrottle`, `goals`, `replicaMovementStrategies`) with their upstream Cruise Control key-value equivalents.
These primitive fields are the primary source of API sprawl.
Instead of maintaining Strimzi-specific field names, `config` entries use the keys and values defined by the [Cruise Control REST API](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs) directly.

> This removes the translation layer between Strimzi field names and Cruise Control parameters, allowing users to consult Cruise Control documentation directly and new Cruise Control parameters to be supported without changes to the Strimzi API.

Reviewer 7: How is this going to change the way we document CC? It feels like we need some sort of plan because the current documentation will need to change quite a bit. For example, most of these parameters are documented under `Rebalance configuration tuning properties` section, clearly explaining these are the supported configs relevant for rebalancing only. We also differentiate which ones can be configured in Kafka CR under  `spec.cruiseControl.config` and which one can only be configured in KafkaRebalance (e.g. rebalance_disk). With this proposal, we will basically support all the other options that were not documented as supported except `dryrun`, `json`, or `verbose`. 

Also if we refer them to look at CC REST API documentation, this could make users confused, as to which fields are now high level dedicated fields and which fields are not (e.g. brokerid). And when doing different kind of rebalance, should they be pointed to specific sections such as https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/rest-apis#trigger-a-workload-balance, rather than general doc page, and they have to figure out, which configs apply to which mode? 

I think previously users were able to just rely on our doc for general use, without necessarily checking the CC REST API doc unless there is a specific need. Now they will have to check both docs, so I think from doc perspective, this will change a lot of things and it would be helpful to be clear on that now, rather than later.

Reviewer: This is a good point but I don't think we should rewrite the CC usage documentation within the Strimzi doc. It would become stale soon. 
I think we'll need examples but referring yo the CC Wiki for details. 

> We also differentiate which ones can be configured in Kafka CR under spec.cruiseControl.config and which one can only be configured in KafkaRebalance (e.g. rebalance_disk). With this proposal, we will basically support all the other options that were not documented as supported except dryrun, json, or verbose.

The spec.cruiseControl.config part is not going to change with this proposal. It doesn't have a specific API but already get all Cruise Control configuration parameters. We are going to have a config section for the KafkaRebalance which is mostly about the query string parameters in the CC REST API. But again I don't think we should replicate the CC Wiki here.

Author: This is a fair point, yes the documentation will need to be updated for sure. We should defiantly add/edit documentation to demonstrate how to use the new and old `KafkaRebalance` API but leave the explanations of the Cruise Control parameter fields to the upstream [Cruise Control Wiki](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs) to avoid stale and/or duplicate documentation.

We will of course keep documentation for the top-level fields that are not being deprecated. We can remove
the definitions of the deprecated fields once they have been fully removed in a future API version. Users will still need to reference the upstream Cruise Control Wiki for advanced or less common parameters as they have in the past. 

This way, users will not have to reference both documentations any more than they already had to in the past. Of course, in a future API version where the deprecated fields are removed, users will need to consult the Cruise Control Wiki for those parameters, but this is the same responsibility we already place on users for the Kafka and Cruise Control server configurations.

>  With this proposal, we will basically support all the other options that were not documented as supported except dryrun, json, or verbose

For this we will generate a list of unsupported configurations from lists we maintain in the `FORBIDDEN_PREFIXES` and `FORBIDDEN_PREFIX_EXCEPTIONS` constants in the  KafkaRebalanceSpec (in the same manner that we do for Kafka configurations in the `kafka.spec.config` of the `Kafka` resource)

Anyways, I have added some text to the implementation section to address this, let me know what you think!

Reviewer 6: I would prefer to keep the documentation in the current extent. The Cruise Control documentation does not make it easy to find these options currently. And its not like Cruise Control is a dynamic project with many changes. We can revisit it if Cruise Control comes out of its zombie mode. But I would prefer to skip with the docs in Strimzi for now.

Author: >  But I would prefer to skip with the docs in Strimzi for now.

That sounds fine by me

Reviewer 7: I think the updated `Update documentation`section addressed my initial concerns around the doc.

    concurrent_intra_broker_partition_movements: "2"
```

#### Example of an `add-brokers` rebalance
```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: add-brokers-rebalance
spec:
  mode: add-brokers
  brokers: [3, 4]
  config:
    goals: "RackAwareGoal, ReplicaCapacityGoal"
    concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker: "10"
    replication_throttle: "20971520"
```

#### Example of a `remove-disks` rebalance
```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: remove-disks-rebalance
spec:
  mode: remove-disks
  volumes:
    - brokerId: 0
      volumeIds: [1, 2]
    - brokerId: 2
      volumeIds: [1]
  config:
    stop_ongoing_execution: "false"
```

### Future Extensibility

This structure enables cleaner additions for future modes. 
The top-level operand fields (`brokers`, `volumes`) provide a stable, reusable targeting mechanism and allow supporting new optimization parameters without the need to update the Strimzi `KafkaRebalance` API.
One example of this would be to add broker demotion support.

With the proposed API, such a feature could look like this:

> #### Example of a `demote-brokers` rebalance

Reviewer 7: Nit: because you mentioned this `volumes can be reused by any mode that needs to target specific volumes on specific brokers (e.g., remove-disks today, demote-brokers in the future)` above, I wonder if the example should be with volume field.

Author: Added another example in my latest commit, let me know what you think!

### Problems with the current approach

1. **API Sprawl**: Each new mode requires adding new top-level fields, making the API increasingly difficult to understand and maintain.

2. **Poor Field Organization**: Mode-specific and common fields are mixed at the same level, making it unclear which fields apply to which mode without consulting the upstream Cruise Control documentation or implementation code.

3. **Documentation Burden**: As more modes are added, the documentation must explain increasingly complex field interdependencies and conditional requirements.

4. **Future Mode Constraints**: Adding new modes becomes increasingly difficult as the top-level namespace becomes crowded with mode-specific fields.

5. **Action-Specific Naming**: The `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field encodes a specific action ("move replicas off") in its name, making it unsuitable for reuse by future modes that target volumes for different purposes (e.g., broker demotion). 
This forces each new volume-related mode to introduce its own field.

## Motivation

The motivation for this proposal stems from several factors:

> 1. **Prevent API Debt**: As discussed in planning for future modes (like broker demotion support), we should not continue adding primitive fields to the top-level spec for every new mode.

Reviewer 5: Maybe you can add a link to the broker demotion issue if there is one?

Author: Done.

A generic `volumes` field allows these modes to reuse the existing targeting mechanism.

## Proposal

### API Structure Redesign

Consolidate auxiliary configuration fields into a new `spec.config` map, keeping `mode`, `brokers`, and adding a new `volumes` field at the top level of `spec`:

- `mode`: A string representing the rebalancing operation (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, `remove-brokers`, `remove-disks`)
- `brokers`: A list of integers identifying the brokers the operation targets.
  Accepted in 2 out of 4 of the current rebalancing modes.
  This field will remain a top-level field because it is simpler for users to work with and easier to validate.
- `volumes`: A list of objects, each containing a `brokerId` (integer) and `volumeIds` (list of integers), identifying the volumes the operation targets. 
  Replaces the current `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field with a generic name that can be reused by any mode that needs to target specific volumes on specific brokers (e.g., `remove-disks` today, `demote-brokers` in the future).
  Accepted in 1 out of 4 of the current rebalancing modes.

>   This field will remain a top-level field because it is simpler for users to work with and easier to validate.

Reviewer 6: Would it make sense to join these? Have some structure like:

```
nodes:
  - brokerId: 1
    volumes: # Optional by default (used only when needed)
      - volumeId: 0
      - volumeId: 2

Author: @fvaleri made a similar suggestion too [0]

I actually considered something like this early on but thought it best to keep `brokers` since its simple and is used in other resources like in the `BrokerCapacityOverride` section of the `Kafka` resource. 

[0] https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/216#pullrequestreview-4831030116

Reviewer: I am on the same page as @fvaleri and @scholzj.
If we do this way, @kyguy is there anything we can do with the `BrokerCapacityOverride` to apply the same pattern? (of course, it's a no goal for this proposal).

Author: Let me think more on this and I will get back to all of you on this.

Author: I have got @tinaselenge on my side 😛

> I see there is an ongoing discussion around brokers and volumes fields, how to join them. I'm kind of in-between with this but leaning more towards the way you currently proposed, keeping them as separate fields. These fields are specific to different modes and are never used together. When removing/adding brokers, I find the current brokers field that takes a list of broker Ids, is simpler. And then removing/demoting disks, has a dedicated volumes field is also simpler even though it also takes list of broker Ids. The current structure makes the intention clear and the validation simpler (e.g. brokers field is only required for remove/add brokers mode). So I'm happy if you stick with the current design, but if the consensus goes toward joining them, I'm fine with that too.

I still think keeping `brokers` and `volumes` as separate fields is the simpler and cleaner approach per Tina's comments above. Given Tina's points, can I persuade you to this side? Or do you still feel we should join the `brokers` and `volumes` fields? 

CC @fvaleri @scholzj @ppatierno

Reviewer 4: I think on balance I would agree with joining the fields. If we in future added broker and disk demotion my understanding is that with the current proposal users would use `volumes` for the disk demotion, but for broker demotion I don't think it would be obvious to users whether they should then also use `volumes` for broker demotion, or use the `brokers` field.

The main reason I could see for having top level field `brokers` is to allow users to specify a list of `volumes` that applies to every broker in the `brokers` field. But I'm not sure if we want to make the API that complex, or if being able to easily e.g. remove the same volume from every broker is something users commonly want to do, and that's not what the current proposal implies

Author: Alright alright you all make a good point, I surrender :white_flag:

In the latest commit I have consolidated the fields `brokers` and `volumes` fields into the design that Fede and Jakub suggested and added a section at the bottom of the proposal justifying the decision. 

Thanks for the feedback everyone! Brings us another step closer :hugs:

> - `config`: a map replacing the existing primitive fields with their upstream Cruise Control key-value equivalents:

Reviewer 6: Could you list here:
* The new option name as it will be in `.spec.config`
* An example value

Author: Fixed in latest commit.

    The CRD validation can verify the value is a List<String> but cannot check whether the referenced goals are valid.
    Moving this field under `.spec.config` alongside the other configuration options provides a more consistent user experience and its frequent use does not depend on top-level visibility.
  - `replicaMovementStrategies`: Accepted in 3 out of 4 of the current rebalancing modes.
    We expect infrequent usage of this field and representing it as a primitive provides limited benefit.
    While CRD validation can verify that the value is a string, it does not check whether the referenced movement strategies are valid so this alone does not justify maintaining it as a top-level field.
    Moving this field under `.spec.config` alongside the other configuration options provides a more consistent and intuitive user experience.

  These primitive fields are the primary source of API sprawl.
Instead of maintaining Strimzi-specific field names, `config` entries use the keys and values defined by the [Cruise Control REST API](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs) directly.

> This removes the translation layer between Strimzi field names and Cruise Control parameters, allowing users to consult Cruise Control documentation directly and new Cruise Control parameters to be supported without changes to the Strimzi API.

Reviewer 6: Would we still do some validation? If not, can you share examples of how the errors would look like for misconfiguration? I.e.:
* What will we show in our logs
* What will we show in the KafkaRebalance status
* What will be only in the Cruise Control logs?

These are pretty important.

Author: Added in latest commit.

#### Proposed API Structure

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: my-rebalance
spec:
  mode: remove-disks  # full, add-brokers, remove-brokers, remove-disks
  volumes:
    - brokerId: 0
      volumeIds: [1, 2]
    - brokerId: 2
      volumeIds: [1]

  # All auxiliary configurations consolidated under config
  config:
    stop_ongoing_execution: "false"

> ```

Reviewer 6: Would it make sense to include a but more of these including before and after state?

Author: Fixed in latest commit.

When this operand is used for modes where it is not relevant (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, or `remove-brokers`), an error is written in the status of the `KafkaRebalance` resource and warning is logged.
- `config` - A map using upstream parameter names as specified by the [Cruise Control REST API](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs).
The following config keys will replace the primitive fields that are currently used in the `KafkaRebalance` API:
  - `goals` - Optimization goals (comma-separated string)
  - `skip_hard_goal_check` - Whether to skip hard goal checks
  - `excluded_topics` - Regex pattern for topics to exclude
  - `replica_movement_strategies` - Replica movement strategies (comma-separated string)
  - `rebalance_disk` - Enable intra-broker disk rebalancing
  - `concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker` - Concurrent inter-broker movements per broker
  - `concurrent_intra_broker_partition_movements` - Concurrent intra-broker movements
  - `concurrent_leader_movements` - Concurrent leader movements
  - `replication_throttle` - Replication bandwidth throttle in bytes/sec

### Implementation Strategy

> 1. **Introduce the new `config` map and `volumes` field** while maintaining backward compatibility:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. **Introduce the new `config` and `volumes` fields** while maintaining backward compatibility:
```

The `map` is a bit confusing given we have ConfigMaps that are something else.

Author: Fixed in latest commit.

   - Add a `config` field of type Map<String, String> and a `volumes` field of type List<BrokerAndVolumeIds> to the `KafkaRebalanceSpec` alongside the existing fields.
   No existing fields are removed so the legacy fields (for example, `moveReplicasOffVolumes` and `goals`) will continue to be supported when specified in the `KafkaRebalance` resource.

>    - Ensure both the legacy fields and the new `config` and `volumes` fields use the same implementation underneath.

Reviewer 5: So if I understand correctly, the users will be able to use both ways until we remove the legacy fields?

Author: Yes that is correct.

  configuration, we will maintain `FORBIDDEN_PREFIXES` and `FORBIDDEN_PREFIX_EXCEPTIONS` constants in the
  KafkaRebalanceSpec.
     These constants will help filter keys in `spec.config` that conflict with operator-managed behavior or top-level fields, for example:
      - `dryrun`: managed by the operator as part of the rebalance proposal lifecycle.
      - `json`, `verbose`: response format parameters managed internally by the operator.
      - `brokerid`: broker targeting is handled by the top-level brokers field.
      - `brokerid_and_logdirs`: volume targeting is handled by the top-level volumes field.

     If forbidden fields are used, the KafkaRebalanceOperator will ignore them and log a warning which is consistent with existing Strimzi behavior for `spec.cruiseControl.config` in the Kafka resource.

> 2. **Add validation** that warns about using old and new API structures.

Reviewer 6: We have automated warnings about deprecated fields. So you should update the implementation accordingly.

Author: Fixed in latest commit.

>    - Update the KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator to ignore the legacy fields when they conflict with the new fields, use the new fields, and log warnings indicating that the legacy fields have been ignored.

Reviewer 5: I think if a user is mixing both type of fields, shouldn't the validation just move the Rebalance resource to NotReady and log that we have use either of them and not both at the same time? Wdyt @tinaselenge @ppatierno ?

Author: That makes sense, as in users have to commit to the new API format or else they will get an error, correct? That might help users avoid confusion and encourage them to migrate to the new API, it might even reduce code complexity. I was on the fence on this originally but I like this idea.

We have a similar conversation happening on this thread here [0], let's follow up there!

[0] https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/216#discussion_r3188095852

   - Update the KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator to log deprecation warnings whenever legacy fields are used.

3. **Deprecate old fields and plan removal**
   - Mark the following legacy fields in the `KafkaRebalanceSpec` with the `@Deprecated` and `@DeprecatedProperty` annotations: `goals`, `skipHardGoalCheck`, `rebalanceDisk`, `excludedTopics`, `concurrentPartitionMovementsPerBroker`, `concurrentIntraBrokerPartitionMovements`, `concurrentLeaderMovements`, `replicationThrottle`, `replicaMovementStrategies` and `moveReplicasOffVolumes`

>    - These fields will be removed in a future API version.

Reviewer 6: They will be removed in Strimzi 2.0.

Author: Fixed in latest commit.

| `verbose`               | Changing verbosity could break status reporting.                                                                                                |
| `super_verbose`         | Same as `verbose`                                                                                                                               |
| `brokerid`              | Managed via `spec.brokers` top-level field.                                                                                                     |
| `brokerid_and_logdirs`  | Managed via `spec.volumes` top-level field.                                                                                                     |

### Example Configurations

#### Example of a `full` inter-broker rebalance
```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: full-rebalance
spec:
  mode: full
  config:
    goals: "CpuCapacityGoal, NetworkInboundCapacityGoal, DiskCapacityGoal"
    max_partition_movements_in_cluster: "100"
    concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker: "10"
```

> #### Example of a `full` intra-broker (Disk) rebalance

Reviewer 6: Empty line around headers please to make this more readable. Here as well as below.

  - `replicaMovementStrategies`: Accepted in 3 out of 4 of the current rebalancing modes.
    We expect infrequent usage of this field and representing it as a primitive provides limited benefit.
    While CRD validation can verify that the value is a string, it does not check whether the referenced movement strategies are valid so this alone does not justify maintaining it as a top-level field.
    Moving this field under `.spec.config` alongside the other configuration options provides a more consistent and intuitive user experience.

  These primitive fields are the primary source of API sprawl.
  Instead of maintaining Strimzi-specific field names, `config` entries use the keys and values defined by the [Cruise Control REST API](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs) directly.
  This removes the translation layer between Strimzi field names and Cruise Control parameters, allowing users to consult Cruise Control documentation directly and new Cruise Control parameters to be supported without changes to the Strimzi API.

> #### Type Safety Tradeoff

Reviewer: missing blank line

Author: Fixed in latest commit

- `volumes` - List of broker/volume ID mappings for `remove-disks` and future volume-targeting modes (replaces `moveReplicasOffVolumes`)
When this operand is used for modes where it is not relevant (e.g. `full`, `add-brokers`, or `remove-brokers`), an error is written in the status of the `KafkaRebalance` resource and warning is logged.
- `config` - A map using upstream parameter names as specified by the [Cruise Control REST API](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs).
The following config keys will replace the primitive fields that are currently used in the `KafkaRebalance` API:
  - `goals` - Optimization goals (comma-separated string)
  - `skip_hard_goal_check` - Whether to skip hard goal checks
  - `excluded_topics` - Regex pattern for topics to exclude
  - `replica_movement_strategies` - Replica movement strategies (comma-separated string)
  - `rebalance_disk` - Enable intra-broker disk rebalancing
  - `concurrent_partition_movements_per_broker` - Concurrent inter-broker movements per broker
  - `concurrent_intra_broker_partition_movements` - Concurrent intra-broker movements
  - `concurrent_leader_movements` - Concurrent leader movements

>   - `replication_throttle` - Replication bandwidth throttle in bytes/sec

Reviewer: I was wondering if the above list is just a duplication of what we have under "API Structure Redesign". Should we try to avoid such duplication to make the proposal shorter?

Author: Nice spot, just fixed in latest commit.

4. **Update examples** to encourage use of new API structure
   - Ensure the packaged `KafkaRebalance` resource examples are updated to use new API structure.

5. **Update documentation** to promote the new structure while documenting the old structure as deprecated and point to the upstream [Cruise Control REST API Wiki](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs) where needed.
   - Add a table to the documentation mapping new fields to the corresponding legacy fields that they are replacing.
   - Add examples to show how to migrate from the legacy to the new API structure.
   - Using the `FORBIDDEN_PREFIXES` and `FORBIDDEN_PREFIX_EXCEPTIONS` constants maintained in the KafkaRebalanceSpec we will generate API documentation listing which upstream Cruise Control fields are unsupported by Strimzi in the same way we do for [`cruiseControl.config`](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/configuring#type-CruiseControlSpec-schema-reference) in the Kafka resource.

> ### Validation Improvements

Reviewer: Again here, maybe a good part of this could be moved into the previous section? Not sure it deserves a dedicated section.

Author: Nice spot, just fixed in latest commit.

| `dryrun`                | Strimzi controls this via the rebalance state machine. Proposal generation vs. execution are separate states (`ProposalReady` -> `Rebalancing`) |
| `json`                  | Hardcoded to `true` by Strimzi. Changing this would break response parsing.                                                                     |
| `verbose`               | Changing verbosity could break status reporting.                                                                                                |
| `super_verbose`         | Same as `verbose`                                                                                                                               |
| `brokerid`              | Managed via `spec.nodes` top-level field (`brokerId`).                                                                                          |
| `brokerid_and_logdirs`  | Managed via `spec.nodes` top-level field (`brokerId` + `volumeIds`).                                                                            |

#### Error Examples

>   1. **Mixing old and new fields (Strimzi converts with warnings)**:

Reviewer 5: The section heading says `Error examples` but if I read this correctly we don't get any errors in this situation? Maybe you can have a section around it separately or maybe you can edit that heading title?

Author: Updated it to "Validation Examples"

    - brokerId: 4
  config:
    exclude_recently_demoted_brokers: "true"
```

##### Example of `demote-brokers` rebalance, demoting disks of brokers

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: demote-brokers-example-2
spec:
  mode: demote-brokers
  nodes:
    - brokerId: 3
      volumeIds: [1, 2]
    - brokerId: 4
      volumeIds: [1]
  config:
    exclude_recently_demoted_brokers: "true"
```

Note how `demote-brokers` uses the same `nodes` field regardless of whether it targets whole brokers or specific volumes.

#### Cruise Control Parameter Schema Validation

If Cruise Control were to expose a parameter schema per endpoint, the operator could cache it and validate `spec.config` entries locally before making API calls.
This would provide a faster feedback loop without coupling the Strimzi API to specific Cruise Control parameters.
However, this is not possible with the current state of Cruise Control and is outside the scope of this proposal.

## Affected/not affected projects

This proposal affects only the Strimzi Cluster Operator.

## Compatibility

### Backward Compatibility Strategy

The proposal maintains strict backward compatibility.

> Both old and new fields are supported simultaneously and users can mix them freely during incremental migration.

Reviewer 5: Maybe we should only say that both the fields are supported simultaneously?

Author: Fixed.
